If you have seen our broadcast
of the annual meeting
that was held last October,
you are aware of the fact
that our songbook is being revised.
Well, perhaps
some of you missed that broadcast.
So you may be wondering,
‘Why is it necessary
to make changes to the songbook?’
Well, as we explained
at the annual meeting,
some of the expressions used
in our current songbook
were drawn from the earlier edition
of the New World Translation.
That translation has been revised,
as you know.
Instead of
‘the desirable things of the nations,’
we now say,
‘the precious things of the nations.’
Instead of “loving-kindness,”
we use “loyal love”;
“long-suffering”
is rendered “patience”;
and so forth.
Since some of the terminology used
in the songbook had to be adjusted,
the Governing Body decided
to add a few songs as well,
and we are very happy for that.
Now those in attendance
at the annual meeting this year
were invited to sing three new songs,
and one of them
was composed specially
to mark the 100th anniversary
of the establishment of the Kingdom.
If you weren’t present
at the annual meeting this year,
don’t worry, you’ll get your chance
to learn the new songs—and soon!
And you won’t have to wait
until the new songbook is released either.
From time to time,
new songs will be released
on our website for you to download.
Not only that, but at times,
we will even conclude
the service meeting
by singing one of the new songs.
Case in point:
During the week of January 5th,
an entire service meeting
has been set aside
to help us appreciate
our Kingdom songs.
One of the new songs
will be sung on that occasion.
It’s entitled
“The Kingdom Is in Place—Let It Come!”
You guessed it.
That’s the song that was composed
to mark
the Kingdom’s 100th anniversary.
Would you like to hear it?
Please listen and watch.
Jehovah, you always have been,
And always you will be.
You’ve given the throne to your Son;
He rules by your decree.
The Kingdom has been brought to birth;
His rulership will fill the earth.
For now have come to pass
Salvation and kingdom and might.
The Kingdom is in place.
We pray: “Let it come, Let it come!”
The time for the Devil is short;
We know what this will mean.
Though living in times of distress,
We see the things unseen.
The Kingdom has been brought to birth;
His rulership will fill the earth.
For now have come to pass
Salvation and kingdom and might.
The Kingdom is in place.
We pray: “Let it come, Let it come!”
What a majestic song of praise
to Jehovah!
Isn’t that beautiful?
But how can we prepare to sing that song
as well as the others that will follow?
We take you now to our studios
in Patterson, New York,
where our music choral arrangements
are produced.
We’d like to introduce you
to Brothers Ted Adams and Danny Baker
who have worked
with our orchestra for years.
We also have with us
Chris and Susan Mavor,
who both have a background in music.
Ted, we’re counting on you and your guests
to help us prepare to sing the new songs.
Thank you, Brother Splane.
Singing is an important,
prominent feature of our worship.
So we want to be able
to face the challenges
of singing in a congregation setting.
There is a special challenge
when we are learning a new song.
What is that?
Well, I think learning a new song
is like breaking in a new pair of shoes.
At first, the new songs aren’t as comfortable
as the ones that we’re used to singing,
but after singing them for a while,
exerting a little effort,
well, these could become
our most favorite songs to sing.
Now, some of us have
a hard time learning new songs.
But we have to remember
that these new songs
were composed for a good reason.
It’s actually a Scriptural reason, isn’t it?
That’s right.
You know throughout the Scriptures,
we often see an expression like this:
“Sing to Jehovah a new song.”
And the Bible tells us why
new songs were composed and sung
and why we should learn
new songs today and sing them.
The 98th Psalm and verse 1
gives us a good reason.
It says: “Sing to Jehovah a new song,
for he has done wonderful things.”
Now, we think about what Jehovah
is doing today with his organization
—truly wonderful things he’s accomplishing
to glorify his name
and to help his servants here on earth.
And each of us, in our personal lives,
have experienced Jehovah’s wonderful things
in our lives personally.
Not only that, the new songs also reflect
a clearer understanding of the Bible
as well as expressing the love
that we have for Jehovah
and our appreciation for his tender care.
So when we get these new songs,
we can think about what Jehovah
has done for us personally, that’s true,
but also, especially what he’s doing
with the organization now.
This should put us
in the right frame of mind and heart
to really learn the songs.
But what if we feel
that we’re just not as good
as the singers on the recordings?
Well, actually
the singers on the recordings,
some might be interested to know,
very few of those used for vocal renditions
have had any professional training
or professional experience.
So all of them
have had to learn to sing better,
mainly through practice.
And that’s comforting for the rest of us.
We feel like we may not sing so well,
but we all can improve.
We all can learn to sing better.
And, of course, the more you sing,
the easier it will become.
Now some of us hesitate to sing
because we feel the notes
are a bit too high for us.
Would you give us some ideas
how we can change the range of our voice
and be able to sing these higher notes?
Well, you know, for young people,
the range is not a problem,
but as we age, unfortunately,
like the rest of our bodies,
our voices can lose range
like we lose range of motion.
So we can regain some of our range
by doing a type of stretching with our voice,
just as an athlete would stretch
before a game or before going for a run.
We can do that very simply
by using like a humming sound
maybe in the shower, the kitchen, the car,
somewhere you feel comfortable
and just using a humming sound
to gently go through your full range
of your voice,
and then gently pushing the limits of it.
In that way, we can regain
and maintain the range of our voice.
So that helps us with the range,
but now what about those high notes?
Well, those high notes can be
a bit of a challenge, but you know,
there are a couple of things we can do
that will really make them easier to produce.
One is: We need to make sure
we take a really good breath
before we sing the phrase
with the high note in it,
because more breath energy
makes it much easier
to produce a higher note.
Also, physiologically,
we need more space in the mouth
and throat area to make it easier
to produce a high note.
So we would even see that on the outside,
when the mouth gets larger,
going from a lower note to a higher note.
[Vocal exercise]
Then it won’t feel so tight,
and it is easier to produce a higher note.
Good.
So those two things are:
take a deeper, bigger breath
for the high notes
and then more space
created by the mouth.
Good.
Well, now how does
the composing team
help us with some
of these high note issues?
Well, the composers
do take the musical range
of the human voice into account,
including the range of unskilled singers.
And in a musical composition,
in dealing with high notes in particular,
there are basically two ways
to get up there as a composer.
One is to walk your way up there,
going up the scale.
That’s the easier method vocally.
That’s easier to get up there.
At times, in a composition,
there are jumps
from low notes to high notes,
but there are jumps
which are more logical,
musically,
which also makes them
more instinctively comfortable
for us to sing,
even if we are not trained singers.
So the compositions have taken
these factors into account,
and I think, two keys here:
Number one, what Susan
has been talking about
is to try and develop
our voices a little more;
couple that with learning the song.
And if you have
those two things in place,
high notes are not the issue
that maybe you thought they would be.
You know, it sounds
like the fundamentals for good singing
are basically the same as
for good public speaking.
Like the instructions we get
in the Ministry School textbook.
Exactly!
Maintaining good posture,
standing up nice and straight,
and being sure to take
good, deep breaths before speaking.
It’s very true that poor posture
and shallow breathing
are definitely the enemies
of good singing.
It’s just the way that Jehovah created us.
Physiologically, we have
these tiny little vocal chords,
but when we take a good breath
and send the air through them,
then it resonates
through our bones and tissues,
and we can produce sound easily.
Good.
Thanks, Susan.
Good ideas on technique.
Now here’s a problem
that comes up during our meetings.
Sometimes the piano can’t be heard.
The volume of the piano
is not high enough.
And when you
fill the auditorium with voices,
it just drowns the piano out.
Now, how can we handle that?
Well, the key to solving
that problem is
for the brother at the sound console
to be listening.
Listening not just to the piano volume
but listening also to what you referred to
—how the singing is going.
For example, if the singers
can’t stay together
or if they can’t stay
with the piano recording,
they’re either ahead of it or behind it,
then that’s the cue for the sound operator
to turn the piano up.
So the operator, then,
has to be free to focus on the sound.
Just as when you are driving a car,
you have to keep your hand on the wheel
and make adjustments to stay on the road.
Yes, I think “free”
for that task is the key word there.
The reality is that at the beginning
of many of our meeting programs,
the brother or brothers
in our sound department
are trying to multitask
with various little things
that happen
right at the beginning of the program.
And this issue of the piano volume
sometimes just gets overlooked.
So at least one person back there
has to be dedicated
exclusively at that moment
to listening to
and adjusting the piano volume.
And this would be especially true
whenever a new song
is scheduled for a program.
Definitely,
we need to be listening to
the cues
or the music when it’s being played.
But you know this doesn’t relieve us
of the personal responsibility
that each of us has
to become familiar with the music,
even ahead of time,
before going to the meeting,
and that way we can be prepared
to sing the songs when we arrive.
The same way we prepare
for other parts in the meeting.
That’s right.
Well, doesn’t that just put us
right in mind of family worship then?
Because family worship is where
so much meeting preparation
is done typically.
So include the music
during family worship.
Get the songbook out.
Turn on the piano recording.
Sing along.
Even better,
if you can play the piano
or if you play the guitar,
do it live, and sing to it live.
Simplified chords are up there
on jw.org that we can download,
but even for social occasions,
social gatherings, we can sing the songs.
The idea is:
Prepare for this part of our worship
with the congregation or even
for our assemblies and conventions.
Yeah, you know, the faithful slave
has really given us the tools
to be well prepared not only
at our congregation meetings
but also at these events:
the assemblies and conventions.
Months ahead of time the programs
are posted on the website.
And in those programs are the songs
that will be sung at these events,
and so we can be well-prepared
by downloading, as you mentioned,
the piano music
or the sheet music from jw.org
and include that
in our preparation for these assemblies.
And you mentioned downloading
a number of things, but is that hard to do?
Well, they’ve tried
to make it as simple as possible.
On the home page
is the Publications tab.
You click on that; it brings up a tab
on the left side that says Music.
You click on that,
and all the music products are right there:
the MP3s for the vocal renditions,
the piano accompaniment,
orchestral arrangements.
There’s also a tab
for the songbook Sing to Jehovah.
If you click on that,
there’s a PDF tab,
and it gives you all the sheet music
that you need,
including the simplified guitar chords.
Well, you know, Ted,
as simple as that sounds, we do understand
that many still find navigating websites
to be a challenging thing,
and at the same time we know
that some of our brothers and sisters
still don’t own the equipment,
the computer equipment
to do their own downloads.
This is where the congregation,
and in particular
the elders and ministerial servants,
can take the lead in helping
everyone to have these materials.
Because as we help each other that way,
especially the brothers taking the lead,
then this really engenders
a spirit of enthusiasm,
interest in this feature of our worship.
It seems like we have
all the tools that we need, then,
to learn the new songs and be well-prepared
to sing them at our congregation meetings
with the help of the elders,
even as brought out here.
And it really is important to do that
because some of the songs,
besides not knowing
the melodies or the words,
also could be written in a particular style
that maybe we’re not used to singing in.
And so when we listen
to the music ahead of time,
then we can become better familiar
not just with the tune and the words
but also the style
in which they are written.
Well, Chris,
because you mention musical style,
this brings up another personal matter,
I think, for many of us,
and that’s how we view music itself.
The point here is
that it’s all too common in this world
to just be the product
of the entertainment industry
with respect to our musical tastes.
They’re in the business of selling
what you might call “ear candy.”
What that means is that anything
that just quickly catches the ear
and catches on
and becomes popular, well,
that’s a very marketable product,
and they make a lot of money selling it.
Well, it’s kind of like candy
that we like to eat when we are children.
And we still like it when we grow up too,
but the point is that when we are children,
that’s kind of all we want.
Later on, we have to learn
to appreciate and enjoy the foods
that are really better for us
and the ones that we really need.
Well, the music that we use in our worship
is kind of like that healthy food.
We might not yet have the taste for it,
but we need to develop it
because it’s there to nourish us spiritually.
The Governing Body wants us all
to sing praises to Jehovah.
Just like back in King Jehoshaphat’s time
when the army was going out into battle,
there was singing, and the scripture says
they were
“joyfully singing praises” to Jehovah.
So we want to use
all the tools that we have
to learn the new songs
and just start singing.
You know, Ted, I couldn’t help but think
about that Scriptural reference;
it really indicates that those men
were not at all timid
about singing praises to Jehovah God.
And really that sets a pattern for us today.
We should not feel shy or timid
about singing at the Kingdom Hall
or at any of our meetings
—praises to Jehovah God.
And certainly we have the tools now
to learn these new songs
and to be
just like those ancient Israelites,
singing praises to Jehovah
with full heart and joy.
What you just said, Chris,
really helps to make the point
that we should view
our singing in worship
as we view our prayers.
That matter of being timid,
well, prayer is not always easy,
even private prayer is not always easy.
Sometimes we are praying
about something painful
or difficult or something that’s
kind of confusing at the time.
So we’re struggling
for the clear thought.
We’re struggling even
for the words to use in the prayer,
even though it’s a private prayer.
But we still manage
to give that prayer to Jehovah
because we love him
and because we want
to continue worshipping him.
That’s why, even people
with limited vocabularies
can still pray very successfully,
very effectively to Jehovah.
And maybe that’s the way
some of us are as singers.
We’re limited.
But that’s OK.
We still do it,
and we’re not timid about it.
We do it for the same important reasons
that we love Jehovah
and that we
want to worship him in this way.
When we get the new songs,
we want to be excited about learning them.
These new songs express our devotion,
our feeling for Jehovah.
They also keep us in harmony
with the greater understanding of scriptures
and, of course,
how Jehovah deals with us personally.
Now we’ll go back to our studio in Brooklyn.
Thank you so much, panel.
Your insights have been most helpful.